Hello, welcome to RxJS fundamentals.
This is an intro course on how to use
RxJS to solve some common problems.
With that there is one, no expectation
that you've used RxJS before, sounds good.
We're also gonna be completely
framework agnostic.
I know that lot of times RxJS is
associated with angular these days, but
you can use it with anything.
I've used it with React and Redux before.
I use it today the svelte
app that I work on.
It is at the end of
the day just JavaScript so
we're gonna play with it
agnostic of any framework.
And again,
we're gonna start from the very basics.
And kind of build up an understanding.
Cuz in my experience there's
a lot of great content on RxJS.
But a lot of times it's like,
let's go into some conceptual
understanding of marble diagrams, and
then all of a sudden it escalates quickly
until there's seven nested observables.
And you're like I wanna cry.
So we're taking things very slowly, we're
gonna build up from each piece as we get
to some more sophisticated
examples towards the end.
So we will kind of play around
with some basic unit tests,
you understand how some of
the fundamental parts of RxJS work.
Will start building some very kind of
simple interactions in some applications.
And it will solve some of the kind of
common UX issues that come up that RxJS is
just really well suited to handle.
For a lot in a lot of cases,
you don't necessarily need to use RxJS for
everything.
So part of this is understanding
where a simple promise will do.
And where you might end up in a situation
where things are getting a little
squirrely.
At the end of the day,
anything you can do in RxJS,
you can do in regular JavaScript because
our stress is built in regular JavaScript.
The big question is should you, right.
Enough of these things where you
start reinventing the wheel and
throwing global variables or even module
scoped global variables everywhere.
And then eventually you and
your team developed a deep resentment for
you, which I'm going to try
to save you from during this.
So let's just talk,
we're not going to do a whole lot of
the kind of conceptual theory here.
I want to start getting our
hands dirty very, very quickly.
But let's do just at least a high level
understanding of what's going on,
what is RxJS?
What did you just sign up for,
what are we going to be talking about for
the next little bit?
So the I saw this quote from
the RxJS documentation,
you can think of RxJS like lodash for
events.
In lodash we have a lot of helper
functions for dealing with arrays and
objects and all the stuff that just
comes with JavaScript not really having
a standard library that have to speak of,
right?
So lodash gives us a bunch
of utility functions.
Yes, you could write them yourselves.
But a lot of times if you want them
kind of tweaked for performance,
everything along those lines using
a battle tested library makes sense.
RxJS is basically dealing with that,
but things that happen over time.
And you're like, okay, like what?
Well, if you think about it, the way
that our applications work is, we send
the code to the browser, we send some HTML
loads of some CSS and some JavaScript.
We render an initial page that,
the traditional web page, right?
And then really everything that
happens after that, right,
after as soon as we load up that HTML
page and run through the initial scripts.
The event loop kind of just sits there and
waits for stuff to happen, right?
And all that stuff that can happen is
an area where there is a chance that RxJS
might be helpful depending on what kind
of problem you are trying to solve.
Right, things are gonna happen over time,
arrays give you a collection of things all
at once, you can work through the array.
You can map over it, you can filter it.
But if those values come in over time,
maybe through a series of click events,
maybe through a timer,
maze with an API requests, right?
Yeah, you can load it into an array,
recheck the array, or you can just kind of
think about things as streams of events
happening in our application and
write code around that as we go.
So, there is an abstraction for
asynchronous values that is now in
the Ekman script standard, and it's
called promises and promises are great.
I love promises, they're wonderful.
The problem with promises and
this is not really a problem with them
it's just what they promised to do.
Is that they resolve to one eventual
value, right, and so you have a promise of
this one API request or
one thing that happens it becomes a value.
Now imagine programming without arrays or
objects, right?
It's up a series of like go to statements,
you could figure it out, it'd be great.
But the idea of having this
idea of a collection, right?
The way you can think of
a promise as one eventual value,
I think a really good mental model that
could be helpful is thinking about,
effectively an observable as
an array of eventual values.
So promises are one just like
a primitive like a number, a string, or
even a JavaScript object is one object.
And an array can be a set of them.
A promise is good for
one value that could also be an array.
In this case, an observable is things that
are going to happen kind of over time.
So let's talk a little bit about
what some of those things might be.
We have API's, right?
And yes, you set a promise, you go get
the JSON or what have you from an API?
Great, but there's a whole bunch of like
edge cases like do you want to refresh
stuff along those lines?
So promises are great for a happy path.
You even have a catch in the case
that it doesn't work out, but,
if you want to retry
a certain number of times?
Okay, well yeah you could do like
keep a value somewhere in scope and
this try to iterate it and then write
an if statement so on and so forth.
You can see how this things
start to get a little squirrely.
What happens if you want to reload
the data at a regular rate, okay,
now you can do a set interval, and you
can aspire to clean up that interval and
help you get it right.
But you're also matching that with now
the retry thing that we just talked about.
What happens is you want to iterate
across a paginated API, right?
A lot of times as front end engineer,
it's like the reason that I'm employable.
Is because for
a lot of the UI that we want to build,
the API's don't support that.
So I have to do a bunch of Rube Goldberg
machines in order to kind of
get the UI in place.
So if we need to start iterating
recursively, then yes, you could do that.
But could you do that with retries?
Could you do that with
a regular refresh interval?
Starting to pull all these pieces
together like any one thing,
maybe not that complicated.
Pulling it all together requires
a better abstraction so
that we don't get lost
in our own complexity.
So observables can help with all of this.
This is the other part, I used to work
at a company that I will not name.
But we had this idea of a user, right and,
you need to know the current user to
figure out what you can show on
the page that seems fine, right.
And there was an API for
getting the current user, however if yeah,
if you wanted to know whether it was
a regular account or a sub account, well,
that was another API.
Did you want to know if it was part
of a team or an individual account?
That was another API?
Did you want to know if the freemium,
free or premium account?
Well, that was another API.
So in order to figure out what to show
on the page, we had to send out this
battalion of API requests and
try to orchestrate it all at once.
And so we have a lot of situations where
to show a given piece of UI maybe you have
a list index that only gives you
the IDs of the things that match.
If you want to figure out more
data you have to go hit each one
of those individually API's, right?
Coordinating all that stuff can
be somewhat complicated and so
observables seek to help us with that,
right.
And to help us deal with the common error
path and just give us a effectively.
RxJS is not a framework but
if we think about like a scaffolding or
a framework for dealing with
the complexity of orchestrating
multiple things that could
happen asynchronously.
So observables can help with this as well,
then there's all sorts of just little
like UX quality of life things, right?
It's usually good to like show a loading
indicator, all right, and that's fine but
how soon do you show
the loading indicator, right?
Cuz the first time I implement
that this is what happens,
is the API ends up being fast.
And then I showed the loading indicator,
it flashes for a hot minute and
then it vanishes, right.
And so how do you time it?
Okay, I only want to show the loading
indicator in one situation,
if it takes a certain amount of time
show the loading indicator, right?
But what if the API request comes back
right after I show the loading indicator?
Well, even if the API has failed,
I might want to still show
the loading indicator for
long enough time that's not visually
distracting to the user,
even if we're done loading, right.
These are the issues of dealing with
events that happen over time and
coordinating all of these things that
are excess seeks to help us with.
There's all sorts of little other things
like dragging and dropping, right?
You have the like if you
think about that problem.
You end up, all right, so on mouse down on
the element that we want to click, cool.
Then I want to set up an event
listener that is listening for
mouse movements until they release and
we have a mouse up event, right.
And then we also have the issue of
were they're dragging might have other
implications in our UI, right?
If it is a hover state where they
can drop it in that given area,
we might wanna show different things.
So reacting to all those things and
setting up all those different movement
events can be super helpful as well.
So that's the pitch.
That is hopefully I've sold you on
spending some time together learning this.